Add Networking Layer materials to /developers/docs (#5838)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/networking-layer/index.md

---
title: Networking layer
description: An introduction to Ethereum's networking layer.
lang: en
sidebar: true
sidebarDepth: 2
---

> Ethereum's networking layer is the stack of protocols that allows nodes to find each other and exchange information. After the merge there will be two pieces of client software (execution clients and consensus clients) each with their own separate networking stack. As well as communicating with other nodes on the Ethereum network, the execution and consensus clients also have to communicate with each other. This page gives an introductory explanation of the protocols that enable this communication to take place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethereum's networking layer is the stack of protocols that allows nodes to find each other and exchange information. After [The Merge](/upgrades/merge/), there will be two parts of client software (execution clients and consensus clients), each with its own distinct networking stack. As well as communicating with other Ethereum nodes, the execution and consensus clients have to communicate with each other. This page gives an introductory explanation of the protocols that enable this communication.
```

## Prerequisites {#prerequisites}

> Some knowledge of Ethereum [nodes and clients](/src/content/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/) will be helpful for understanding this page.

Reviewer: Helpful or required?

Author: I guess probably required - it will be hard to understand connections between nodes without knowing what nodes are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some understanding of Ethereum [nodes and clients](/src/content/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/) is required to understand this page.
```

## The Execution Layer {#execution-layer}

> The execution layer's networking protocols can be divided into two stacks: the first is the discovery stack which is built on top of UDP and allows a new node to find peers to connect to. The second is the [DevP2P](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p) stack that sits on top of TCP and allows nodes to exchange information. These layers act in parallel, with the discovery layer feeding new network participants into the network, and the DevP2P layer enabling their interactions. DevP2P is itself a whole stack of protocols that are implemented by Ethereum to establish and maintain the peer-to-peer network.

Reviewer: > these **layers** act in parallel, with the discovery **layer** feeding new network participants into the network, and the DevP2P **layer** enabling their interactions.

Too many layers. For consistency, should we just use 'the discovery stack'?

Reviewer: > The second is the [DevP2P](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p)

Maybe it makes more sense to wait until we reach DevP2P to link out

Author: yes, "discovery stack" is much better here, thanks.

> The execution layer's networking protocols can be divided into two stacks: the first is the discovery stack which is built on top of UDP and allows a new node to find peers to connect to. The second is the [DevP2P](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p) stack that sits on top of TCP and allows nodes to exchange information. These layers act in parallel, with the discovery layer feeding new network participants into the network, and the DevP2P layer enabling their interactions. DevP2P is itself a whole stack of protocols that are implemented by Ethereum to establish and maintain the peer-to-peer network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution layer's networking protocols is divided into two stacks:

- the discovery stack: built on top of UDP and allows a new node to find peers to connect to
- the DevP2P stack: sits on top of TCP and enables nodes to exchange information

Both stacks work in parallel. The discovery stack feeds new network participants into the network, and the DevP2P stack enables their interactions. DevP2P is itself a whole stack of protocols that Ethereum implements to establish and maintain the peer-to-peer network.
```

Reviewer: > DevP2P is itself a whole stack of protocols that are implemented by Ethereum to establish and maintain the peer-to-peer network.

This is already somewhat complex. I wonder if containing this context under the DevP2P heading would make it easier for readers to grok this.

Author: ok, updated in next commit.

### Discovery {#discovery}

> Discovery is the process of finding other nodes in network. This is bootstrapped using a small set of bootnodes that are [hardcoded](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/master/params/bootnodes.go) into the client. These bootnodes exist to introduce a new node to a set of peers - this is their sole purpose, they do not participate in normal client tasks like syncing the chain, and they are only used the very first time a client is spun up.

Reviewer: What is a bootnode :-)?

Author: ok will add an introductory sentence here.

> The protocol used for the node-bootnode interactions is a modified form of [Kademlia](https://medium.com/coinmonks/a-brief-overview-of-kademlia-and-its-use-in-various-decentralized-platforms-da08a7f72b8f) which uses a distributed hash table to share lists of nodes. Each node has a version of this table containing information required to connect to its closest peers. This "closeness" is not geographical - distance is defined by the similarity of the node's ID. Each node's table is regularly refreshed as a security feature. In the [Discv5](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/discv5) discovery protocol nodes are also able to send "ads" that display the subprotocols that client supports, allowing peers to negotiate about the protocols they can both use to communicate over.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol used for the node-bootnode interactions is a modified form of [Kademlia](https://medium.com/coinmonks/a-brief-overview-of-kademlia-and-its-use-in-various-decentralized-platforms-da08a7f72b8f) which uses a distributed hash table to share lists of nodes. Each node has a version of this table containing the information required to connect to its closest peers. This 'closeness' is not geographical - distance is defined by the similarity of the node's ID. Each node's table is regularly refreshed as a security feature. For example, in the [Discv5](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/discv5), discovery protocol nodes are also able to send 'ads' that display the subprotocols that the client supports, allowing peers to negotiate about the protocols they can both use to communicate over.
```

Discovery starts wih a game of PING-PONG. A successful PING-PONG "bonds" the new node to a boot node. The initial message that alerts a boot node to the existence of a new node entering the network is a `PING`. This `PING` includes hashed information about the new node, the boot node and an expiry time-stamp. The boot node receives the PING and returns a `PONG` containing the `PING` hash. If the `PING` and `PONG` hashes match then the connection between the new node and boot node is verified and they are said to have "bonded".

Once bonded, the new node can send a `FIND-NEIGHBOURS` request to the boot node. The data returned by the boot node includes a list of peers that the new node can connect to. If the nodes are not bonded, the `FIND-NEIGHBOURS` request will fail, so the new node will not be able to enter the network.

> Once the new node receives a list of neighbours from the boot node, it begins a PING-PONG exchange with each of them. Successful PING-PONGs bond the new node with its neighbours, enabling message exchange.

Reviewer: Is it boot node or bootnode? We should try to be consistent if possible.

Author: ok I think bootnode (this is how it is written in the geth docs for example)

#### Why is discovery built on UDP? {#why-udp}

UDP does not support any error checking, resending of failed packets, or dynamically opening and closing connections - instead it just fires a continuous stream of information at a target, regardless of whether it is successfully received. This minimal functionality also translates into minimal overhead, making this kind of connection very fast. For discovery, where a node simply wants to make its presence known in order to then establish a formal connection with a peer, UDP is sufficient. However, for the rest of the networking stack, UDP is not fit for purpose. The informational exchange between nodes is quite complex and therefore needs a more fully featured protocol that can support resending, error checking etc. The additional overhead associated with TCP is worth the additional functionality. Therefore, the majority of the P2P stack operates over TCP.

> ## DevP2P {#devp2p}

Reviewer: Should this be a subheading of Execution stack?

```suggestion
### DevP2P {#devp2p}
```

Author: yes, updated

---
title: Networking layer
description: An introduction to Ethereum's networking layer.
lang: en
sidebar: true
sidebarDepth: 2
---

> Ethereum's networking layer is the stack of protocols that allows nodes to find each other and exchange information. After [The Merge](/upgrades/merge/), there will be two parts of client software (execution clients and consensus clients), each with its own distinct networking stack. As well as communicating with other Ethereum nodes, the execution and consensus clients have to communicate with each other. This page gives an introductory explanation of the protocols that enable this communication.

Author: ok, had a go at a more gentle intro

## Prerequisites {#prerequisites}

Some knowledge of Ethereum [nodes and clients](/src/content/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/) will be helpful for understanding this page.

## The Execution Layer {#execution-layer}

The execution layer's networking protocols is divided into two stacks:

- the discovery stack: built on top of UDP and allows a new node to find peers to connect to

- the DevP2P stack: sits on top of TCP and enables nodes to exchange information

Both stacks work in parallel. The discovery stack feeds new network participants into the network, and the DevP2P stack enables their interactions.

### Discovery {#discovery}

Discovery is the process of finding other nodes in network. This is bootstrapped using a small set of bootnodes (nodes whose addresses are [hardcoded](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/master/params/bootnodes.go) into the client so they can be found immediately and connect the client to peers). These bootnodes only exist to introduce a new node to a set of peers - this is their sole purpose, they do not participate in normal client tasks like syncing the chain, and they are only used the very first time a client is spun up.

> The protocol used for the node-bootnode interactions is a modified form of [Kademlia](https://medium.com/coinmonks/a-brief-overview-of-kademlia-and-its-use-in-various-decentralized-platforms-da08a7f72b8f) which uses a distributed hash table to share lists of nodes. Each node has a version of this table containing the information required to connect to its closest peers. This 'closeness' is not geographical - distance is defined by the similarity of the node's ID. Each node's table is regularly refreshed as a security feature. For example, in the [Discv5](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/discv5), discovery protocol nodes are also able to send 'ads' that display the subprotocols that the client supports, allowing peers to negotiate about the protocols they can both use to communicate over.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The protocol used for the node-bootnode interactions is a modified form of [Kademlia](https://medium.com/coinmonks/a-brief-overview-of-kademlia-and-its-use-in-various-decentralized-platforms-da08a7f72b8f) which uses a [distributed hash table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_hash_table) to share lists of nodes. Each node has a version of this table containing the information required to connect to its closest peers. This 'closeness' is not geographical - distance is defined by the similarity of the node's ID. Each node's table is regularly refreshed as a security feature. For example, in the [Discv5](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/discv5), discovery protocol nodes are also able to send 'ads' that display the subprotocols that the client supports, allowing peers to negotiate about the protocols they can both use to communicate over.
```

> The protocol used for the node-bootnode interactions is a modified form of [Kademlia](https://medium.com/coinmonks/a-brief-overview-of-kademlia-and-its-use-in-various-decentralized-platforms-da08a7f72b8f) which uses a distributed hash table to share lists of nodes. Each node has a version of this table containing the information required to connect to its closest peers. This 'closeness' is not geographical - distance is defined by the similarity of the node's ID. Each node's table is regularly refreshed as a security feature. For example, in the [Discv5](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/tree/master/discv5), discovery protocol nodes are also able to send 'ads' that display the subprotocols that the client supports, allowing peers to negotiate about the protocols they can both use to communicate over.

Author: yea I've never been able to get an unambiguous answer about the scope of DevP2P. In my opinion although discv5 protocol is part of devp2p stack the networking layer is still best considered to be 3 distinct layers: discovery, devp2p and subprotocols because this divides the whole layer up cleanly by function (find peers, establish and maintain secure connections, implement ethereum protocols).

Discovery starts wih a game of PING-PONG. A successful PING-PONG "bonds" the new node to a bootnode. The initial message that alerts a bootnode to the existence of a new node entering the network is a `PING`. This `PING` includes hashed information about the new node, the bootnode and an expiry time-stamp. The bootnode receives the PING and returns a `PONG` containing the `PING` hash. If the `PING` and `PONG` hashes match then the connection between the new node and bootnode is verified and they are said to have "bonded".

Once bonded, the new node can send a `FIND-NEIGHBOURS` request to the bootnode. The data returned by the bootnode includes a list of peers that the new node can connect to. If the nodes are not bonded, the `FIND-NEIGHBOURS` request will fail, so the new node will not be able to enter the network.

Once the new node receives a list of neighbours from the bootnode, it begins a PING-PONG exchange with each of them. Successful PING-PONGs bond the new node with its neighbours, enabling message exchange.

```
start client --> connect to bootnode --> bond to bootnode --> find neighbours --> bond to neighbours
```

#### ENR: Ethereum Node Records {#enr}

> The [Ethereum Node Record (ENR)](/developers/docs/networking-layer/network addresses/) is an object that contains three basic elements: a signature (hash of record contents made according to some agreed identity scheme), a sequence number that tracks changes to the record, and an arbitrary list of key:value pairs. This is a future-proof format that allows easier exchange of identifying information between new peers and is the preferred [network address](/developers/docs/networking-layer/network-addresses) format for Ethereum nodes.

Author: because the PR that adds that page has not been merged yet...

> The [Ethereum Node Record (ENR)](/developers/docs/networking-layer/network addresses/) is an object that contains three basic elements: a signature (hash of record contents made according to some agreed identity scheme), a sequence number that tracks changes to the record, and an arbitrary list of key:value pairs. This is a future-proof format that allows easier exchange of identifying information between new peers and is the preferred [network address](/developers/docs/networking-layer/network-addresses) format for Ethereum nodes.

Author: working for me...

The hello messages contain:

- protocol version
- client ID
- port
- node ID
- list of supported sub-protocols

This is the information required for a successful interaction because it defines what capabilities are shared between both nodes and configures the communication. There is a process of sub-protocol negotiation where the lists of sub-protocols supported by each node are compared and those that are common to both nodes can be used in the session.

Along with the hello messages, the wire protocol can also send a "disconnect" message that gives warning to a peer that the connection will be closed. The wire protocol also includes PING and PONG messages that are sent periodically to keep a session open. The RLPx and wire protocol exchanges therefore establish the foundations of communication between the nodes, providing the scaffolding for useful information to be exchanged according to a specific sub-protocol.

### Sub-protocols {#sub-protocols}

> #### Eth (wire protocol) {#wire-protocol}

Author: Because "wire protocol" terminology is not specific to Ethereum, and it is implemented in clients under the `eth` namespace. but I don't think it matters, happy to change if you prefer.

#### les (light ethereum subprotocol) {#les}

This is a minimal protocol for syncing light clients. Traditionaly this protocol has rarely been used because full nodes are required to serve data to light clients without being incentivized. The default behaviour of execution clients is not to serve light client data over les. More information is available in the les [spec](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/caps/les.md).

#### Snap {#snap}

The [snap protocol](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/caps/snap.md#ethereum-snapshot-protocol-snap) is an optional extension that allows peers to exchange snapshots of recent states, allowing peers to verify account and storage data without having to download intermediate Merkle trie nodes.

#### Wit (witness protocol) {#wit}

The [witness protocol](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/caps/wit.md#ethereum-witness-protocol-wit) is an optional extension that enables exchange of state witnesses between peers, helping to sync clients to the tip of the chain.

#### Whisper {#whisper}

> This was a protocol that aimed to deliver secure messaging between peers without writing any information to the blockchain. It was part of the DevP2p wire protocol but is now deprecated. Other [related projects](https://wakunetwork.com/) exist with similar aims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whisper was a protocol that aimed to deliver secure messaging between peers without writing any information to the blockchain. It was part of the DevP2P wire protocol but is now deprecated. Other [related projects](https://wakunetwork.com/) exist with similar aims.
```

## The consensus layer {#consensus-layer}

The consensus clients participate in a separate peer-to-peer network with a different specification. Consensus clients need to participate in block gossip so that they can receive new blocks from peers and broadcast them when it is their turn to be block proposer. Similarly to the execution layer, this first requires a discovery protocol so that a node can find peers and establish secure sessions for exchanging blocks, attestations etc.

### Discovery {#consensus-discovery}

Similarly to the execution clients, consensus clients use [discv5](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/phase0/p2p-interface.md#the-discovery-domain-discv5) over UDP for finding peers. The consensus layer implementation of discv5 differs from that of the execution clients only in that it includes an adaptor connecting discv5 into a [libP2P](https://libp2p.io/) stack, deprecating devP2P. The execution layer's RLPx sessions are deprecated in favour of libP2P's noise secure channel handshake.

### ENRs {#consensus-enr}

> The ENR for consensus nodes includes the node's public key, IP address, UDP and TCP ports and two consensus-specific fields: the attestation subnet bitfield and eth2 key. The former makes it easier for nodes to find peers participating in specific attestation gossip sub-networks. The eth2 key contans information about which Ethereum fork version the node is using, ensuring peers are connecting to the right Ethereum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ENR for consensus nodes includes the node's public key, IP address, UDP and TCP ports and two consensus-specific fields: the attestation subnet bitfield and `eth2` key. The former makes it easier for nodes to find peers participating in specific attestation gossip sub-networks. The `eth2` key contans information about which Ethereum fork version the node is using, ensuring peers are connecting to the right Ethereum.
```

### libP2P {#libp2p}

The libP2P stack supports all communications after discovery. Clients can dial and listen on IPv4 and/or IPv6 as defined in their ENR. The protocols on the libP2P layer can be subdivided into the gossip and req/resp domains.

### Gossip {#gossip}

The gossip domain includes all information that has to spread rapidly throughout the network. This includes beacon blocks, proofs, attestations, exits and slashings. This is transmitted using libP2P gossipsub v1 and relies on various metadata being stored locally at each node, including maximum size of gossip payloads to receive and transmit. Detailed information about the gossip domain is available [here](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/phase0/p2p-interface.md#the-gossip-domain-gossipsub).

> ### Req/Resp {#req-resp}

Reviewer: Agree but calling it "Request **and** response" feels unusual to me.

> ### Req/Resp {#req-resp}

Reviewer: Using Wikipedia's approach: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Request%E2%80%93response

```suggestion
### Request-response {#request-response}
```

> The request/response domain contains protocols for clients requesting specific information from their peers. Examples include requesting specific Beacon blocks matching certain root hashes or within a range of slots. The responses are always returned as snappy-compressed SSZ encoded bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The request-response domain contains protocols for clients requesting specific information from their peers. Examples include requesting specific Beacon blocks matching certain root hashes or within a range of slots. The responses are always returned as snappy-compressed SSZ encoded bytes.
```

## Connecting the execution and consensus clients {#connecting-clients}

After the merge, both consensus and execution clients will run in parallel. They need to be connected together so that the consensus client can provide instructions to the execution client and the execution client can pass bundles of transactions to the consensus client to include in Beacon Blocks. This communication between the two clients can be achieved using a local RPC connection. Since both clients sit behind a single network identity, they share a ENR (Ethereum node record) which contains a separate key for each client (eth1 key and eth2 key).

A summary of the control flow is shown beloiw, with the relevant networking stack in brackets.

##### When consensus client is not block producer:

- consensus client receives a block via the block gossip protocol (consensus p2p)
- consensus client prevalidates the block, i.e. ensures it arrived from a valid sender with correct metadata

> - The transactions in the block are sent to the execution layer as an execution payload (local RPC connection)

Author: yes, the engine-API is for the consensus-execution client communication. I'll add a note here.

- The execution layer executes the transactions and validates the state in the block header (i.e. checks hashes match)
- execution layer passes validation data back to consensus layer, block now considered to be validated (local RPC connection)

> - consensus layer adds block to head of its own blockchain and attests to it, broadcasting the attestation over the network (consensus p2p)

Reviewer: We're mixing full and fragmented sentences here

##### When consensus client is block producer

- consensus client receives notice that it is the next block producer (consensus p2p)
- consensus layer calls `create block` method in execution client (local RPC)
- execution layer accesses the transaction mempool which has been populated by the transaction gossip protocol (execution p2p)
- execution client bundles transactions into a block, executes the transactions and generates a block hash
- consensus client grabs the transactions and block hash from the consensus client and adds them to the beacon block (local RPC)
- consensus client broadcasts the block over the block gossip protocol (consensus p2p)

> - other clients receive the proposed block via the block gossip protocol and validate as described above (consensus p2p)

Reviewer: As above, sentence fragments are combined with full sentences.

> Once the block has been attested by sufficient validators it is added to the head of the chain, justified and eventually finalised.

Reviewer: 🇬🇧🇬🇧🇬🇧
